KEP-3895: kubectl delete: Add interactive(-i) flag (#3896)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-cli/3895-kubectl-delete-interactivity/README.md

updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

kubectl delete is disruptive and irreversible command and should be used cautiously. However, there
are various circumstances such as inaccurate usage, mistyping, hasty tab completions, etc. that 
this command can position the cluster to a state where it is not intended to be. Due to the backwards
compatibility concerns, asking confirmation to user before proceeding to genuine delete as default is out of the table.

On the other hand, we need to provide a way to mitigate accidental deletes to users and this KEP
proposes a new flag, namely interactive(-i) that will ask confirmation to user to proceed deletion.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports

> -->

Reviewer: Your summary should be moved to motivation section, since it's more elaborate. Then write a new one-sentence summary, for example:
```
Introduce interactive mode for `kubectl delete` command, to allow users protect cluster 
administrators from irrevocable removal of critical resources. 
```

### Goals

- Introduce interactive(-i) flag to be used for asking confirmation to user to proceed actual delete operation or not.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->
- Smart solutions on client side to detect deletion is accidental or not

> - deletion protection mechanism on server side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deletion protection mechanism on server side
```

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

> User passes `interactive` flag to kubectl delete command and all the resources planned to be deleted will be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user passes `--interactive`/`-i` flag to `kubectl delete` command all the resources planned to be deleted will be 
```

shown to the user as preview. Command continues deletion process if user confirms by typing `y`. If user types `n` or
any other value other than `y`, process will be cancelled and command returns a message with zero exit code.

```sh
$ kubectl delete --interactive -f test_deployment.yaml 
You are about to delete the following 2 resource(s):
Deployment/dockerd
Deployment/dockerd2
Do you want to continue? (y/n): n
deletion is cancelled

$ kubectl delete -i -f test_deployment.yaml
You are about to delete the following 2 resource(s):
Deployment/dockerd
Deployment/dockerd2
Do you want to continue? (y/n): y
deployment.apps "dockerd" deleted
deployment.apps "dockerd2" deleted
```

For the alpha phase, this flag will be hidden behind `KUBECTL_INTERACTIVE_DELETE` environment variable and
can only be use when this `KUBECTL_INTERACTIVE_DELETE=true` environment variable is exported.

> ### Technical Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Implementation Details/Design
```

> One of major advantage of this feature is the ability of showing resources as preview before deletion. That means

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of major advantage of this feature is the ability to preview all resources before deletion. That means
```

> we need to traverse all resources twice. First one is for confirmation and the other one is for deletion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we need to traverse all resources twice. First one is for display, and the other one is for deletion.
```

However, that comes along with a technical limitation that `Visit` function does not support traversing twice
as stated in [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6d7a9048b67d81e57923892650a23636f1afba42/staging/src/k8s.io/cli-runtime/pkg/resource/result.go#L91-L94).

> 

Reviewer: Drop this paragraph, you're continuing your thought below and paragraph is misleading.

> But we also can not use `Infos` function as suggested in the link above, because that unties the builder configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But we also cannot use `Infos` function as suggested in the link above, because that unties the builder configuration
```

and deletion logic.

> In order to overcome this limitation, this KEP will use separate builder to show resources as preview. Current builder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to overcome this limitation, this feature will use separate builder to show resources as preview. Current builder
```

will continue being used as deletion traverse, other builder will be used for preview. Builders must match in terms of 

> configurations to prevent such discrepancies and required tests will be added to assure that configurations are same or not.

Author: > Could be solved for example by testing the object presence in uidMap which the wait is using.

Thanks, that is a good suggestion. Maybe if the resource in not found in `uidMap`, we can warn user about this and continue. Moreover same problem also exists when user is prompted about the confirmation and user types `yes` after prolonged delay.

> configurations to prevent such discrepancies and required tests will be added to assure that configurations are same or not.

Reviewer 2: I think that would be quite surprising and probably better to skip such object. If the user expects new objects to be appearing soon, they should cleanup again. And,  I guess we don't want to implement recursive delete/confirm logic :)

> configurations to prevent such discrepancies and required tests will be added to assure that configurations are same or not.

Reviewer: Very good suggestion from Filip about keeping an `uidMap` and only work on the resources that a user explicitly agreed to. The system is moving constantly, we should be operating on the view that was created during the first invocation and to which user explicitly agreed to.

> configurations to prevent such discrepancies and required tests will be added to assure that configurations are same or not.

Reviewer: We should probably make it explicit in this proposal, that when using interactive in combination with selectors or all-namespaces (not sure if others) we will execute delete operation ONLY on those presented resources.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

> As a user, I want to have an option via a flag to list me all the resources being deleted as preview and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a user, I want to have an option via a flag to list all the resources being deleted as preview and
```

> proceed to genuine deletion only if I confirm it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proceed to actual deletion only after explicit confirmation.
```

#### Story 1
As filed in this issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/1365;

> user tries to delete all persistentvolumeclaims in a namespace by intending to type;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user tries to delete all persistentvolumeclaims in a namespace:
```

```sh
$ kubectl delete --all pvc -n yournamespace
```

However, mistyping `pv` instead of `pvc` deletes all persistentvolumes in the cluster, 
since persistentvolumes are non-namespaced resources.

#### Story 2
As filed in this issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/696;
user executes `kubectl delete --all namespaces` without enough knowledge about the
consequences of this command.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->
- In terms of backwards compatibility, this flag's default will always be false.
- If user cancels deletion, exit code will be 0.

> - This flag will not be used with `--raw` flag. 

Reviewer: Does it implies a validation step which will ensure that these two won't be mixed up?

Author: yes, it implies a validation step as in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/114530/files#diff-392180beecd29a85943c8448ca6439158ec6b2b6611460f70a1251ac4871c71aR285-R287

    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->
N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History
The KEP was proposed on 2023-03-01
<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->
N/A

## Alternatives

> 

Reviewer 2: another alternative would be:

`kubectl delete pod -l group=abc -i`: would ask once (same as the KEP)

`kubectl delete pod -l group=abc --interactive=never|once|always`: would delete resources according to the `WHEN` parameter

Pros:
- long version similar to rm
- can be set in kuberc according to the user's needs

Cons:
- not sure how feasible/hacky it is to do with cobra

Author: This sounds like a good idea but I agree to that `not sure how feasible/hacky it is to do with cobra`

Maybe, we can try to enhance this feature with this in the future.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->
- Smart solutions on client side to detect deletion is accidental or not
- Deletion protection mechanism on server side

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
When a user passes `--interactive`/`-i` flag to `kubectl delete` command, all the resources planned to be deleted will be 
shown to the user as preview. Command continues deletion process if user confirms by typing `y`. If user types `n` or
any other value other than `y`, process will be cancelled and command returns a message with zero exit code.

```sh
$ kubectl delete --interactive -f test_deployment.yaml 
You are about to delete the following 2 resource(s):
Deployment/dockerd
Deployment/dockerd2
Do you want to continue? (y/n): n
deletion is cancelled

> $ kubectl delete -i -f test_deployment.yaml

Reviewer 3: Just curious, what was the reason behind passing the resource through a file. Could it be `namespace/resource_name` (for ns scoped) and `resource_name` (for cluster scoped)?

Also is the file name a required argument? Would `kubectl delete deployments --interactive` provide all the list of deployments in the cluster to be deleted?

Author: > Just curious, what was the reason behind passing the resource through a file. Could it be `namespace/resource_name` (for ns scoped) and `resource_name` (for cluster scoped)?
> 
It is a pretty standard way of passing resources to the commands and as you can see in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/c5b95f60faa5dc2acfb5397e1a83909c24ec1791/staging/src/k8s.io/cli-runtime/pkg/genericclioptions/filename_flags.go#L62, it is added to all commands.

> Also is the file name a required argument? Would `kubectl delete deployments --interactive` provide all the list of deployments in the cluster to be deleted?

File name is not required and `kubectl delete deployment test --interactive` should also work.

can only be use when this `KUBECTL_INTERACTIVE_DELETE=true` environment variable is exported.

### Implementation Details/Design

One of major advantage of this feature is the ability to preview all resources before deletion. That means
we need to traverse all resources twice. First one is for display, and the other one is for deletion.
However, that comes along with a technical limitation that `Visit` function does not support traversing twice
as stated in [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6d7a9048b67d81e57923892650a23636f1afba42/staging/src/k8s.io/cli-runtime/pkg/resource/result.go#L91-L94).
But we also cannot use `Infos` function as suggested in the link above, because that unties the builder configuration
and deletion logic.

In order to overcome this limitation, this feature will use separate builder to show resources as preview. Current builder
will continue being used as deletion traverse, other builder will be used for preview. Builders must match in terms of 
configurations to prevent such discrepancies and required tests will be added to assure that configurations are same or not.

> Moreover, deletion will only be performed to the resources whose `uidMap` match the ones in the preview list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, deletion will only be performed on the resources whose `.metadata.uid` match the ones gathered in the preview list, to ensure we remove only the resources a user explicitly agreed to. 
```

Reviewer 4: Does this need a stronger guarantee like RV based matching?

Author: Thanks for review @enj.
We need to not delete the resources whose are not in the preview list(especially the cases where user types `y` after a couple of hours and preview list becomes stale most likely). And `uid` based check allows us to do it and this looks sufficient for our aim(Since `kubectl delete` does not know resource versions of resources, that might complicate the issue).

bogged down.
-->

As a user, I want to have an option via a flag to list all the resources being deleted as preview and
proceed to actual deletion only after explicit confirmation.

#### Story 1
As filed in this issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/1365;
user tries to delete all persistentvolumeclaims in a namespace;
```sh
$ kubectl delete --all pvc -n yournamespace
```

However, mistyping `pv` instead of `pvc` deletes all persistentvolumes in the cluster, 
since persistentvolumes are non-namespaced resources.

#### Story 2
As filed in this issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/696;
user executes `kubectl delete --all namespaces` without enough knowledge about the
consequences of this command.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->
- In terms of backwards compatibility, this flag's default will always be false.
- If user cancels deletion, exit code will be 0.

> - This flag will not be used with `--raw` flag. 

Reviewer 4: How does this change behave in regards to label based deletion, especially if the set of objects matched by the label changes?

Author: This problem is also true for default delete behavior(although agree that this is much more visible with this interactivity flag). We'll delete the resources whose are listed as preview and user confirms. If set of objects belonging to the some label is changed, user should execute `kubectl delete` again.

Reviewer 4: Include the intended behavior in the KEP.

Author: Updated. Does it make sense?. Thanks.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->
Only standard input via terminal will be supported because main motivation of this flag
is to provide a way to users. That would be a risk if there is exceptional inputs whose are available

> for users that we can not handle.

Reviewer: I'd propose stating this something like:

This mechanism will apply only to client-side operation (`kubectl delete`) and as mentioned in non-goals section is not meant to solve server-side protection, which can be addressed using custom [ValidatingAdmissionWebhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#validatingadmissionwebhook), for example.

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->
Yes

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?
User will continue deleting resources without being asked confirmation as now.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

> No, users can only use this feature via enabling environment variable.

Reviewer 4: You need a test (likely an e2e) that shows that you cannot use the feature when the env var is not set.

Author: That is a good point and I'll add a test case for this. Do you want me to update also the KEP by mentioning this?

Reviewer 4: Yes.

-->
N/A

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->
N/A

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->
If user is being asked for confirmation, when running delete command.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->
 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details: If user is being asked for confirmation, when running delete command.

Reviewer 4: From a PRR perspective, it is unclear to me if a cluster admin would need to know about this.

Author: Actually all the people who have delete permissions can check this feature is enabled or not. Do you want me to update with this?
